Good afternoon.
It's good to see so many people
here who have checked out of
their hotels looking for a nice,
cool, dark place to catch some rest
before they take their flight back
to wherever it is they came from.
Have you guys caught all the other
WebObjects sessions this week?
Catch some good sessions?
Who caught...
Who caught Steve Heyman's presentation?
Come on.
Steve Heyman?
And then we had James Dempsey singing,
right?
Okay.
Well,
are there any Canadians in the room?
Yeah?
Well, I'm not Canadian.
I'm from New Orleans, Louisiana,
and I'm not going to sing or
play the guitar or anything.
We're going to talk about some really
interesting stuff about WebObjects.
Now, a guy came up to me
yesterday and he said,
"Fitz, what is it that makes WebObjects,
an application server,
better than all the other application
servers out there?" And I said,
"How should I know, Bob?
You're the product manager."
Thank you for your jaded applause.
Anyway, we're going to talk about making
your WebObjects applications faster.
We have a couple of goals.
We're going to finally
eliminate performance
bottlenecks in your components,
in your application,
in your enterprise object model.
We're going to talk about three areas.
We're going to talk about the tools
needed to identify trouble spots,
including tools that
ship with WebObjects.
We're going to talk about certain
types of bottlenecks to look for
in your WebObjects application.
And then we're going to talk
about certain techniques which
you can use from the get-go
that will eliminate bottlenecks.
We're going to talk about
when to do performance tuning.
Do you do it now?
Do you do it later?
Do you wait till you finish your app?
Do you start from the beginning?
We're going to talk about some
tools that ship with WebObjects
that make things a lot easier.
Playback.
WoEvents, WoEstats,
other methods to measuring
performance of your app.
We're going to discuss specifically
WebObjects and UOF techniques
to improve your performance.
There's a lot of other techniques out
there which we're not going to focus
on related to programming in general,
but those are for
definitely another session.
And last,
when it's time to upgrade your hardware.
When it's time to get
more RAM in that machine,
when it's time to get more processors,
when it's time to
increase your processors.
Fortunately, WebObjects, I'm sorry,
increased the number of machines
you have for app servers.
Fortunately,
WebObjects makes it really easy to
add machines to your server farm.
Now, I'm a big fan of Donald Knuth.
I used to be a big LaTeX fan
about eight or nine years ago.
Anybody else here use LaTeX?
Way back in the old days when XML wasn't
even really the cool buzzword yet.
Premature optimization
is the root of all evil.
Now, I put this in here specifically
because that is one of the
things that I am most guilty of.
When I sit down,
we get a design for application,
we start coding,
and I just want everything
to be really pretty.
We've got a nice clean slate.
I want it to be fast.
I want to make sure I don't do anything
that is a performance bottleneck.
Unfortunately,
that's not the time nor the place
for doing that kind of work.
You want to work towards
functional stability.
You have a specification,
you create your application.
You want to get functionally stable
before you start optimizing things.
Because you never know when you're
going to add or remove functionality.
You may optimize something that doesn't
even wind up in your final application.
You may optimize something that is
buried in a myriad of other heavy
duty methods and it turns out that
it was just a waste of your time.
You don't want to sacrifice good design
and maintainability for optimizing.
You don't want to wind up loosing
everything into a single method that
is 375,000 lines long just because
it goes 10 milliseconds faster
on your little performance meter.
Speed is not everything.
Optimization is about making your
application faster but making your
development time just as fast.
It's also about maintainability.
Another thing I'll talk about is a big
carpenter adage which is measure twice,
cut once.
I usually cut my finger first.
You want to measure, modify,
and then measure again.
So create a controlled environment.
This is really important.
Create a controlled environment.
Do a measurement.
Make a change that you think
might be an improvement.
Run your controlled test again
with no other change in it.
And then you can get conclusive evidence
as to what helps and what hinders.
Our technology framework
provides a number of different
very handy things to help you
measure your performance.
WoEvent profiles methods
in your components.
It's an extremely precise method
for measuring what parts of
your application take more time.
There is also WoeStats.
WoEstats is a very,
very enlightening thing to
have on your application.
You can pull that up and tell
at a quick look on one page
what components are faster,
what components are slower.
You can see mean time.
You can see the slowest
access or the fastest access.
It tells you a lot about what
your components are doing.
The Playback Manager can
simulate multiple users.
You set an NSUser default
in the command line,
run your application with
the recording enabled,
and then when you quit the application,
then you can play back
this session with one user,
simulate 10 users, simulate 200 users
hammering your application.
Lastly, and one of my personal
favorites is SQL debugging.
We all know that EOF generates
SQL to talk to your database.
I'm really happy to say that I haven't
put a line of SQL in an application
since I started using WebObjects.
And that was one of the things that
really made my life hell before
I discovered this technology.
This shows you exactly all the
SQL that WebObjects generates
and sends to your database,
as well as information about
what WebObjects gets back.
WebObjects gets back commit messages.
It gets back, it says,
beginning internal transaction,
finishing internal transaction.
It'll tell you how
many rows it gets back.
It'll tell you when it's committed
changes to your database.
So before we get started
measuring and testing,
we need to come up with
a test environment.
So you want to have your test environment
mirror your deployment environment.
If your deployment environment is
two Sun Enterprise 10,000s with 64
processors and 4 terabytes of RAM,
you don't want to make your test
system an old G3 that you found
in the back closet with about
32 megabytes of RAM running
something completely different.
You want to go for the
same operating system.
If you're deploying on Solaris,
test on Solaris.
If you're deploying on Mac OS X,
test on Mac OS X.
Don't switch and modify and change
your environment in midstream.
You want to attempt to mirror
the number and kinds of servers.
Now, this is something that is
a little difficult to do,
especially for really
large-scale deployments.
If you've got a half a million
dollars worth of big iron you're
running your deployment on,
you obviously can't afford
that for your test environment.
However, what you want to do is try and
mirror it as closely as possible.
Try a particular scaled-down
test environment of your
deployment environment.
And lastly, you want to isolate the test
environment from your users.
You don't want to have your
test environment running in
the same segment of your LAN as
your production environment.
You don't want them
sharing the same database,
for example.
And I've seen that happen where
a test environment uses the same
database as the production environment.
You're not going to get,
you have so many variables
other than what you're testing,
you're not going to get any
conclusive results at all.
Now,
so we've got our test environment set up.
We've gone out and bought more hardware.
Now we're going to determine
what pages are important.
You have an application with 20, 30, 40,
100 pages.
Make a list of the pages.
What pages are going to be frequented
every time someone comes into the app?
For example, your main page,
that's something you should work at
to make blisteringly fast because
first impressions are paramount.
When a user comes in and they
see your application's front
page takes half a minute to load,
no matter how fast the
rest of the app is,
they're still going to be left
with that initial thought like,
God, I got here and it took me half
an hour to get to the front page.
Establish acceptance criteria.
What you want to do is decide
what is acceptable and acceptable
speed for my application.
If you decide that you want every
page to return in half a second,
well, then work to meet that goal.
If you want every page to return
in a minute and your users will put
up with that and not go elsewhere,
well, then that's a goal to work for too.
You might want to work
on a big query page.
Say you have a query page that returns
thousands of objects or raw roads,
as we'll discuss later on.
Maybe that should return in five seconds.
There are certain cases where
a longer wait is acceptable.
Decide how many users you
want to support concurrently.
Is this application a small data
entry app for a small company
where you're going to have 20 or
30 people working on it a week?
Or is it a large online store or
an online presence where you're
going to have hundreds of users
hitting the app at the same time?
Determine what you want to test for.
Next, create test cases which
exercise the important pages.
Chris is going to give us a little
demo of using Woe Playback and then
checking with Woe Stats and Woe
Events to see the speed of certain pages.
So you might want to create specific
isolated cases for certain pages
that are critical to your app.
Okay, now we're going to talk about
preparing your test cases.
Enabling recording for your application.
The Woe Recording Path.
So if you have your application,
you've finished your feature complete,
you're ready to do a
little bit of optimization,
you set the command line argument,
Woe Recording Path,
you set it to a directory.
In our case,
we use temp slash foo dot rec.
This is our directory where the
WebObjects Application will write
out a series of transactions,
requests and response,
which records your visiting the app.
Manually execute a test case.
Set up that variable,
set up that NSUserDefault
in your application,
launch the application,
execute the test case,
stop the application.
Now you can repeat this with different
directories for each test case.
You can point the Woe Recording Path at
different directories and say this test
case is going to test the big fetch page.
This is going to test the main page.
This is going to test a simulated
user walking through the application,
finding something and then going
back to another part to purchase.
purchase something, for example.
Now, when you run your test cases,
so now that we've enabled
that user default,
we're going to pull that
off of the command line,
and we're going to run the app
like we would run it in deployment.
Now, there's certain defaults that you're
going to want to enable or disable
when you deploy your application.
First is Woe Caching Enabled.
Woe Caching Enabled,
which defaults to No,
is what allows you to do rapid
development on your application.
It allows you to make changes to
your .wad and your .html files,
save them, and reload them in your
browser and see it immediately.
By setting this to Yes,
WebObjects knows that it's safe to
cache these templates in memory.
So you'll get a small hit the
first time WebObjects reads
the templates off the disk,
but it will cache them next time
it will just follow a pointer,
a reference.
I'm sorry.
In memory to retrieve that information.
Woe debugging enabled.
You want to set that to no, especially,
most especially,
if you use woeapplication.debugstring.
That's a great method to use.
You can put tons of debugging print
statements in your application,
which you'll see in your console.
And then when you deploy,
kick this over to no
and go your merry way.
You won't see any of those.
You'll still see log strings.
You'll still see printlns and whatnot,
but it'll turn those off for you.
Last but not least,
and it's something that I want to
say with a little bit of a caveat,
is Woe allows current request handling.
That defaults to No.
Now what this enables,
if you turn this on,
is multi-threading in your application.
This can provide a dramatic speed up,
but I strongly,
strongly encourage you to be familiar
with the caveats of multi-threaded
programming before you turn this on.
In my experience,
multi-threading bugs are extremely
difficult to track down and,
believe me,
it's something that you don't want to end
up working with if you're not familiar
with multi-threading programming.
So now that we've got all that set up,
we're going to disable the recording,
start more than one instance if
you're looking at a large deployment,
start one instance if you're
looking at a small deployment,
whatever your test environment is.
Run the playback,
run one playback concurrently, two,
run one at a time, run them serially.
Let the system achieve steady state.
Now this is very important.
You have to remember that
your application contains
methods that start and stop.
A new session is created and it lives
for a certain period of time and dies.
The session death and birth are
something that's very important
to your application because your
application is going to run all day,
24/7.
So what you want to do is let it reach
a point where sessions are expiring
and new sessions are being created.
So it will create a sort of a steady,
receive a sort of a steady state.
So we've run our application,
we've done our playback,
we've been recording,
we've done our playback.
Now we're going to take a look and
see what kind of information we can
find out about this application.
First we're going to look
at a couple of pages.
We have Woe Stats and Woe Events set up.
Now, these are direct actions.
They are out of the box now, disabled.
You need to set a password
for them to use them at all,
which we've done in our sample app.
And the Woe Stats is something
you can just go to at any
point after you've hit the app,
and it's going to give you this
aggregate data that's collected about
your application on a component level.
Now, a component, as we know,
can be as big as a page,
as small as a character.
So, it'll give you information
on all of those.
You might want to pay
attention to the page ones.
You might want to pay attention
to a certain subcomponent
that's taking a lot of time.
Configure event recording.
Now, event recording is something
you need to go in and turn on.
There's several different
buttons you can set to say,
these are the kind of events I want
you to gather information about.
WebObjects can amass an incredible
amount of events in a second.
I don't even remember what the number is.
Maybe NQ and one of the guys
from engineering can say.
But it's blisteringly fast and has
very little effect on your application.
So, you go to World Events Setup, say,
tell me what these events are,
do your playback,
and then you can come back and look
at the World Event Display page to
see sub-transaction times all the way
down to the method granular level.
Now,
for those of you who have been around
doing WebObjects work since the old
days when we used that other language,
anyway, there were tools available
for you called gprof,
gmon.
You'd have to build your
app in profile mode.
You'd have to run your application.
You'd have to quit your application.
You'd have to run it through.
You'd have to run another program.
And you'd get this really nice
information that told you about this.
Well, that's really great,
but that's something that
you had to prepare for.
You had to sit down.
It was very time consuming.
This is something that
happens on the fly,
in the product, out of the box.
So we've done that.
Now we can use WoeStats to find the pages
that don't meet our acceptance criteria.
Maybe we found a page
that takes 10 seconds.
Well, let's look into why.
What's taking so long on that page?
Is it a method that's very expensive?
Is it a fetch to the database?
Is it a multiple fetch to the database?
Well, event display,
after you find out what
pages are giving you trouble,
can tell you what methods on
that page are giving you trouble.
Who's taking the most
time in your application?
You can evaluate,
and you should evaluate the times
relative to the total time that
your application is running.
Pay attention to what is used the most.
If you have a page that's hit once
a day in the corner and it's really
expensive and it takes 20 minutes,
you might not want to dedicate
resources to fixing that page.
You may instead want to
dedicate resources to making
the front page faster.
or the query that everyone does.
Now I'm going to ask Chris Mine,
senior consulting engineer
with Apple Eye Services,
to come up and give us a demo about
using wall recording and playback.
Chris?
So we need the guest one.
Thanks.
So we're going to skip
the recording portion,
because we did that earlier.
But just to show you what
that looks like as a result,
use the whole recording path.
And we created this--
As a result of going through our
application in a typical usage fashion,
we ended up with this recording.
And inside here are a number of files.
You can see the request and
response is making up transactions.
So this only has eight transactions,
or excuse me, nine transactions in it.
And then we'll just look at one
of the contents of one of these.
You may be able to tell from that
that it's a typical HTTP request.
It's just recording the request that came
in from the browser that the app got,
and then afterwards it records
the response it sends out.
So that should look a
lot like an HTML page.
So then I've already got
this application running.
Actually, it's this one here.
And then from a command line,
I'm just going to start up
our playback where it's going
to read from that directory,
send each of the requests
to the application,
and then compare the result with
what it gets back this time.
So we can see up here that it's going
along doing some logging to show you
that it's actually hitting the app.
In this case,
we only have one playback going,
and we have only one
application instance.
And down here,
you can see some of the results and the
information that's coming back for us.
So you can see it's got
perhaps the requests.
It'll go through zero through eight,
and then it starts over.
So the next one will be a new session.
So each time it gets to
the initial request again,
that's going to the main page again,
and that's starting a new session.
And then you can see
the transaction times.
Let me stop that for a second.
Over here,
this is the comparison of the bytes
that it expected to get versus the
bytes that it actually did get.
So that can, in some respects,
you can tell if there's a
real problem with your app,
maybe a defect of sorts.
If it's returning back
something wildly different,
that might well be an error page,
something dramatically
different than what it expected.
So let me start that running
again and go have a look at
the... well stats information.
So we got the login page
as mentioned before.
By default, this will come up.
If you haven't set up your app
to allow you to log in here,
you can't.
There isn't a command
line option for that.
It's kind of a security feature.
And there's a lot of
information in this page.
We're only interested
today in part of it.
So I'll just go down to that bit.
This happens to be, you can see here,
there's two major sections.
There's component action
statistics and the direct actions.
As you can see,
there are no component actions,
and that's because this app relies
exclusively on direct actions.
We see here on the left the page names.
It doesn't give you anything that's
at a subpage level in this view.
And then I'd like to point out these
minimum and maximum times over here.
You can see that it's not
terribly obvious on this hardware
because it's ripping fast,
but on my laptop it showed a
dramatically different value
for the max and for the min.
I mean, this one's still pretty large,
but it just goes to show
that maybe on the first hit,
first time you hit the
main direct action,
the default direct action,
it might take a lot longer
for something to happen,
but then over time, this average is going
to go lower and lower.
And you can see there the
0.01 versus the half a second.
So another thing we should
be able to see in here,
what we just saw there is that
our session timeout is very short.
I think we set it to about 15 seconds
just to demonstrate this other feature.
which is the current active
sessions versus the maximum.
So here we have 163 sessions created.
But our current active
session is only 68.
It's likely to stay
at 68 for a long time.
It might fluctuate, go up or down one.
But it shows this app's essentially
being driven at a steady state.
Which is essentially what we want,
because otherwise information
we get about CPU usage and
information we get about RAM usage
would be pretty much irrelevant.
So now go on to the WoEvent display.
So here's the event logging
that Fitz referred to.
We're just going to look
at component events.
Then once you set up what
events you're interested in,
you can actually display those events.
In this case,
we're going to just reset this.
To get a fresh view.
So our playback is still running,
so this information is
still getting updated.
And you can see that for
the component events,
there's the pages,
but it's also the subpage
components as well.
There's different sorting capabilities
to show these events in different ways.
So we'll group them by page.
Then we can see something like
Oh, perhaps that the add movie page
takes what seems like an awful
long time for the number of
calls relative to anything else.
So if you were going to get
some sort of speed increase,
you might look for something
in here on an app-wide basis.
Something else that's worth noting
is that if these times per call
are below what your criteria is,
then you're pretty much done.
So this just tells you you don't
have any performance tuning to do,
which is pretty much the
case in this application.
But you can drill down in
here and see where the cost of
rendering a component comes from.
So at the bottom of things we see the
WD footer costs pretty much nothing.
So maybe I had to turn my attention to
the WD table element if I were going to
look for a place to pick up some speed.
Okay, and that's it.
Now we're going to,
and now we've talked about
ways of measuring your
performance of your application,
we're going to talk about techniques for
improving the speed of your application,
techniques specific to WebObjects
and the Enterprise Object Framework.
Now, maybe we could review this week.
We talked about there were two
enterprise object adapters available.
There were the JDBC adapter
and the-- anyone else remember?
The NUN adapter.
Now, the NUN adapter is extremely fast.
There are absolutely zero
round trips to the database.
And however, it's not quite as useful
as the JDBC adapter.
We want to reduce trips to the database.
EOF writes, as I said before,
the SQL and sends it to the database,
and the database sends back, well, data.
Sometimes,
EOF will ask for the database for
data in a not so intelligent manner,
we might say.
It might repeatedly ask the database
for little bits of data that it could
have just asked for all at once.
So to find out where
these problems exist,
we turn on the user default,
EOAdapterDebugEnable.
Now for those of you who use print
statements in your application to
see what some value of something is,
where some sort of value changes,
or where you are currently
in the request response loop,
you'll see a number of print
statements go by on your console.
When you turn on
EO Adapt or Debug Enabled,
you are going to see more
stuff on your console than
you ever knew what to do with.
You're going to see when
EO F first logs into your database.
You're going to see every
round trip thereafter.
tons and tons and tons of
fun things to look through.
Now, when you look at this
information that UF tells you,
perhaps you'll see that there's
multiple round trips for your database
for one request response loop.
Maybe you're fetching, for our example,
those of you who are familiar
with the movies database,
I'm not creative enough to come up with
election results and stuff like that.
So I grab the movie database.
It ships.
It's in the Java business logic examples.
It's tried and it's true.
When I fetch movies,
and then perhaps I navigate some
of these faults one at a time,
as each fault fires,
it might make a separate
trip to the database.
And it's extremely inefficient because
we all know that each round trip to
the database is pretty expensive.
So we're going to talk about
ways that you can optimize that.
One is to use batch faulting.
Tell EOF that when you
fire off one fault,
go get a whole bunch more.
We're going to use prefetching.
Tell EOF, when you fetch these entities,
I want you to fetch these entities.
relationships at the same
time just because we're going
to be using it pretty soon.
We could use a shared editing context.
This was a recent addition
to WebObjects last year.
Fantastic.
People were already doing this,
putting an editing context in their
application and talking to it.
This is a really intelligent editing
context that has relations to each
editing context in the session.
You could put reference data
into the shared editing context,
fetch it when your application starts up,
and never fetch it again.
Or, well, there's a little detail on
that I won't go into right now,
but it will refresh your data eventually.
So if you have a WoW pop-up
containing all the cities
that your company may service,
or a WoW pop-up containing something like
all the products in your product line,
and something that doesn't change
or changes very infrequently,
it might be a great candidate
for shared editing context.
Make your app read-only.
This is extremely fast.
If you have an application, a scenario,
for example, where you have a back-office
application where users enter data,
where they change data,
where they delete data,
and then a front-end application.
You can actually go ahead and put
everything in the shared editing context.
And your application will rarely have
to go back to the database for anything.
Not only is it extremely fast,
but it's extremely memory
efficient because you don't
have all these duplicate copies.
Remember,
each editing context that contains an
object has another copy of that object.
For very good reason, mind you.
But when there's situations
where you can avoid that,
you certainly would want to.
Last, you want to avoid heraldry.
You want to avoid recurring
fetches of reference data.
Certainly, the shared editing context
takes care of that for us.
Another thing we can do is
reduce the amount of data
that we get from the database.
You can use raw rows for non-object
data and very large fetches.
Raw rows are, as you'll see,
they're a big speed improvement
on just a standard fetch,
because they fetch the information
into EOF just as always.
The information is
fetched in the database,
columns and rows, put into a dictionary,
but instead of taking the next step
and creating your enterprise objects,
objects with the business
logic built into them,
you just get this raw data.
Just straight attributes.
There's occasions where it's
very convenient to have that.
Use fetch limits or don't
allow unrestricted searches.
Now,
I have to say right now that my favorite
search engine out there is Google.
You know, you go to that,
I find obscure error messages,
I type the error message into Google,
and it comes back with a
page with the answer on it,
you know?
I mean, who, anybody else does this?
Anyone else?
Cough or something, you know?
Is anybody still awake out there?
My goodness.
Shouldn't have eaten those big lunches.
It only gives you,
you can search for the word
"apple" and you'll get hundreds
of thousands of responses.
It'll say, "Found four bajillion pages."
And it's only going to show you 200.
Encourages you, as a user,
to refine your search.
Maybe you want to look for "apple
computer." "Apple computer G4."
"Apple computer G4 with a cinema
display." Maybe I'll optimize
your programming experience.
Um...
Don't allow unrestricted searches.
Make the user enter
some sort of criteria.
Now this isn't always necessary.
If you have a company with 50 employees
and they have search on last name,
search on first name, sure,
let them hit return,
let them get all 50 employees and
surf around to the heart's content.
If you work for a big company
that has 200,000 employees,
this might not work so well.
An unrestricted search might allow
them to fetch your whole database,
at which point your DBA is going
to come hunt you down and kill you.
And then you're also going to
run a memory in your machine.
So now, I'm going to go ahead and give
you a little demo of some of
the things that we did here.
So, let's see.
We should have two different
screens coming up shortly.
Now those of you who have been to
the WebObjects sessions this week,
you guys have probably seen
some really cool demos,
some really cool graphics.
You saw XM Elementary, you know,
we got movie mechanics.
You know, I have to confess,
when I finished writing this
demo yesterday at about 11.30,
it looked like, you know,
W3C Consortium around like 1994,
you know,
gray background with the big HRs across.
We handed all this stuff
over to Matt Furlick.
A lot of you know Matt Furlick,
who really made this stuff look great.
Let's hear it for Matt.
Okay, so what I have here is an
application called Moving Mechanics,
which I've already cranked up
and done some fun stuff with.
So I'm going to stop it for starters.
And, yeah, I didn't even mean that.
And now we're going to
start the application again.
And when it decides to start up here,
there it goes.
We have a couple of different
defaults that I've set up in here.
In fact, I could probably still go ahead
and take a look at this thing here.
Let's see.
Optimization.
Did I click that right?
Optimization targets.
Yeah.
Anyone?
Resize?
Oh, it's way down here hiding, right?
There we go.
Okay, you'll see I have EO Adaptive
Debug enabled to yes.
I've got it set to WOL port
1729 because I'm hitting it
from this machine over here.
And then WOL auto open in browser.
No, I'm not a big fan of the
auto open in browser thing.
So let's go back to where we were.
So the application is launched here and
you'll see it says welcome application.
It gives you this URL and
some other information.
And the first thing it tells you
here is connecting with dictionary.
Okay?
It's connected to our database.
It began an internal transaction,
fetched five rows.
Okay?
Now the first example we're going to
do here is our shared editing context.
Ah ha.
See it showed me.
Shared editing context example.
Okay?
We're going to take a shared
editing context using objects
from a shared editing context
versus a shared editing context.
Versus using objects that
we're just going to straight
fetch from the database.
So as you see we have those five objects.
So when I click on this, alright,
you notice up here, no change.
[Transcript missing]
Let's talk about what these do.
The shared editing context.
Fetch is the data at the
beginning of your application
when your application starts.
No round trip to the database.
It's way fast.
And it's great for reference data.
The regular fetch is just a
plain old fetch and it requires,
at the least,
a round trip to the database.
And as you can see, there's a lot faster.
Shared editing context, again,
this is basically following a reference.
And the regular fetch
talks to the database.
So now we'll move on to something
a little more interesting,
batch fetching and pre-faulting.
So let me see,
can I see a clap or make a noise?
Who's used the batch fetching
and pre-faulting here?
That's faulting and prefetching.
Okay, so we're going to have some people
who already know the answer to this,
right?
So we have three ways
of getting this data.
We do a regular fetch.
Now, the way this component works
is I'm fetching all movies
out of the movies database,
all 88 of them,
and then I'm iterating through the movies
and I'm touching the roles relationship.
Each movie has a role.
Indiana Jones, for example,
has Harrison Ford,
has the role of Indiana Jones and
the role of Marion and whatnot.
I'm triggering that fault.
For each movie.
So iterating, triggering those faults.
Now, we have a regular fetch,
which it just goes through,
does the fetch and then
triggers those faults.
We have batch faulting on,
which sets the batch faulting
on the roles relationship to 25.
So what that tells EOF is that when
you fetch these bunch of movies,
And you navigate to this
particular relationship,
go ahead and get some extra
stuff while you're there.
You know,
you run into the grocery to pick up milk,
pick up some butter, you know,
is it a stick of butter, a loaf of milk,
a loaf of bread and a gallon of milk?
Pick up some other stuff while
you're there because it's
likely we're going to need this.
And last but not least, pre-fetching,
which is a very particular thing,
which says when we fetch the movies,
I want you to pre-fetch these
certain attributes of the
movies while you're there.
Okay?
So, we have these three things.
Regular fetch, batch faulting,
pre-fetching.
Who thinks the regular fetch
is going to be fastest?
Anyone?
Thanks, Mark.
Who thinks batch faulting
is going to be the fastest?
Come on, it's a little racier.
Anyone think batch faulting?
You all know that
pre-fetching is at the bottom,
so it's the fastest, right?
All right, who thinks pre-fetch is
going to be the fastest?
All right, all right.
Okay,
so let's see what's going to happen here.
Regular fetch.
Look at that.
Oh, my God, would you look at that.
Every one of those big lines that begin,
from begin internal transaction,
to commit internal transaction.
It's a round trip to the database.
Now, man, I can't even,
that was a lot of round
trips to the database.
Look at that.
88 to be precise.
Let's find out how long that took.
That took 7.04 seconds.
Now mind you,
on my laptop this takes like 20 seconds.
Batch faulting.
Look at that.
Now, we saw a good number of
transactions go by here,
but they're a little different looking.
Right there.
You see here,
this is some information I put in here.
Whoa, whoa, it's still going.
What's it doing now?
Hello.
Someone telling me to do this machine?
Anyway, let's see what that comes out to.
Okay.
So anyway, here we have this transaction
here that fetches...
In this case, 84 rows.
It fetches,
it has a big or select statement.
Select the role where the movie
ID is this or this or this or this.
So it comes back with a whole bunch more
of these relationships on the first shot.
Pre-fetching.
Boom.
Right back at you.
How many fetches was that?
Two.
Now look at the difference from that.
A regular fetch where you're faulting,
you're doing multiple round
trips to the database.
Many, many,
many round trips to the database.
Seven seconds here.
2.23 seconds for batch faulting
and 0.5 seconds for batch faulting.
52 seconds for pre-fetching.
Now, here's something that's
interesting about this.
Some people out there might be saying,
well, geez,
of course the first one's slowest
because then you fetched it all in.
In sleep, in this component,
I'm invalidating all objects
in my editing context,
which pretty much wipes everything
clean and makes the EOF do
everything all over again.
So we'll try this again just to show you
that there's nothing funny going on here.
It's actually going to the
database again each time.
It's going to be a little faster because
certain things are cached and happy.
and what not.
So, batch fetching,
2.40 seconds this time,
and last but not least, the prefetching,
39 seconds, 0.39 seconds.
Let's talk a little more about them.
Regular fetch,
one round tip to the database
for each fault fired.
It can be extremely inefficient, very,
very time consuming.
Batch faulting, it's defining the
relationship in question.
Now, this is the difference between
batch faulting and prefetching.
Batch faulting,
you can define that programmatically
or in EOModeler per relationship.
You define it once in EOModeler,
and your applications use your model,
and they just go their merry way,
and it just happens.
To many relationships only,
you can't do batch faulting
on a 2-1 relationship.
This fetches, again, the next n objects
whenever a fault is fired.
So, for example, in this demo,
we set batch faulting across
the roles relationship to 25.
So, it fetches one,
it faults in one relationship,
and it gets the next 25.
Last is prefetching.
It's used on a fetch specification,
so you have to consciously go in
when you create a new fetch and say,
I want you to prefetch these things.
When you get the movie,
I want you to prefetch the director,
and I want you to prefetch the roles.
Or, and you can prefetch
multiple relationships.
It adds only one round trip to
your original fetch and it's very,
very fast.
So enough of that.
We'll move on to probably
another one of my favorites,
raw rows.
Now, raw rows and objects.
I just kind of blew it.
I hit the button already.
So what I'm selecting here are all
the movie rolls in the database.
I wanted something with more data.
Obviously, I don't have that much
data in this database.
The difference is seemingly small
when you have a small amount of data,
but when you have a lot of data,
the difference is really, really big.
So, I just fetched the raw rows,
inadvertently,
and let's take a look and see
what the time was on that.
.08 seconds.
Now, I'm going to fetch objects.
Now, raw rows fetches rows
out of the database,
every column in the row.
In this case,
I'm fetching every column in the row.
You can write SQL and only
fetch certain columns,
if you wish.
You can fetch the primary key
and maybe the title of something.
But in this case,
I've fetched everything.
It gave me back a bunch of dictionaries.
Objects, I fetched the information
from the database.
You get all attributes for each object,
and they're wrapped
in Enterprise Objects,
and boom,
you have your Enterprise Objects.
So, let's see how fast that goes.
.13 seconds.
Now, we'll click it a couple times here
to sort of let things normalize
out and see what the difference is.
The difference, it depends.
You'll see different speeds,
but in the most part,
it tends to come up.
.3 seconds.
So, about 50% or so of speed improvement.
If you tweak out your raw row fetch,
you can see a really,
really huge improvement.
Now, there is a fantastic,
fantastic article that I used
for reference on this on Stepwise
written by Malcolm Crawford,
and I think he's sitting right there,
that tells you in great, great detail.
Thank you, Malcolm.
Yeah, there you go.
There you go.
Malcolm, as we all know,
has done a number of
good services this week.
Let's talk a little more...
Let's talk a little more
about what these do.
Raw rows.
Raw rows don't instantiate
enterprise objects.
You just get back dictionaries.
Key value.
Title, Indiana Jones.
Director, George Lucas.
It was Lucas, wasn't it?
Music, John Williams.
OK.
It's very fast.
Doesn't have to select all columns.
Objects is just a plain old fetch.
It creates objects for
all the EOs it fetches.
And it can be slow for
very large fetches,
especially when you're dealing
with tens of thousands of objects.
I'm not going to take a look
at WoEvents setup right now,
but I will really quickly see if
I can hit on WoEstats and see what
it tells me about this application
of mine that I was running.
Okay, so here we are.
We have Be Nice and Share,
which is my little shared editing
context demo with an average time.
That's basically pretty fast because
even the non-shared part is only
fetching a little bit of data.
There's the venerable main.
RoundTrips.
RoundTrips is where we did the
different kinds of fetching,
batch faulting, and prefetching.
Look at that.
The max is 7.2.
You see that?
That was the roundtrip where
we went and batched and we
single faulted everything in.
And last but not least, RawRows,
which was basically
pretty fast because again,
we're just fetching the object.
A single fetch, as you can see,
we fetched 450 rolls.
Still, that was very fast.
Let me just kick something over here.
And so it was very fast
because we just fetched.
I did one roundtrip to the database.
So that's about it.
Let's get back to the slides now.
Thank you.
Okay.
You know,
I had to get a Star Trek joke in,
but I'm not a big Star Trek Voyager fan,
you know, so I went with the classic,
right?
Lazy instantiation.
I took a programming
WebObjects 2 class at Apple.
In fact, I took programming WebObjects 1.
But programming WebObjects 2
was taught by Kai Christensen.
It was an absolutely fantastic teacher.
Anyone had Kai for a teacher?
Thank you.
It was the greatest class.
I didn't fall asleep once.
Kai said something to me that
just absolutely killed me.
He said, when you're programming,
he says,
you want to cook your steak until
it's smoking and then 10 seconds less.
And I said, Kai,
what the hell does that mean?
He said, you want to wait to the absolute
last second to do something.
If you don't have to do it,
don't do it because it may turn out,
you know, 20 feet away from here.
You don't have to do it.
Use lazy instantiation.
This is an example here.
We have Shatner's ego,
which is going to take a long time
to get because it's really big,
as we all know.
So the first time it's called,
it checks this private
instance variable to say,
is this null?
If it's null, it goes ahead, fetches it,
squirrels it away in the
instance variable for the next
time someone comes through,
and then returns it.
Huge bonus.
It's a great little trick to use.
Back to EOF stuff.
Subclass EO generic records.
Instead of EO custom object.
EO generic record has a couple of
little tweaks to the key value code
and the way it stores the information
for the attributes of your EO.
It's blisteringly fast,
especially in WebObjects 5.
It's absolutely incredible
what they've done with this.
Don't overwrite.
Now, another thing that Eogeneric
Record does as well is,
by default, deferred faulting is enabled.
Now, let's say we fetch a movie,
and it has several attributes.
It has role, it has a link to director.
What we used to do in the old days,
back in the 1990s,
we used to create a fault for
each one of these attributes.
Now, if a movie,
let's say it has 10 possible faults,
and we fetch 1,000 movies, okay?
So, we've just had to create 1,000 movie
objects plus 10,000 fault objects.
Now, the Eogeneric Record, by default,
creates one shared fault for
all these different faults.
That's an incredible speed-up
because you don't have to create
all these additional objects,
even though the fault objects were small.
Next, and this one seemed a
little bit obvious to you,
but I've seen some people
do some weird stuff.
Don't override value for key.
Key value coding,
one of my greatest friends
in the WebObjects framework,
patented key value coding,
as we all know, and we know that software
patents are evil as well.
Don't override that.
Value for key and take value
for key are called incredibly
often in enterprise objects,
in your woke components,
and they're optimized to
be as fast as possible,
something you don't want to override.
Certainly, if you're debugging and you
want to put something in there,
print statement,
but make sure you rip that whole
thing out when you're done.
[Transcript missing]
This is one of the things
that really blew my mind when
someone explained it to me.
They said, when you synchronize,
when you go through the
request response loop,
if you put a simple string in your page,
it's going to print out
the title of a movie.
Or something,
or you have your own subcomponent,
let's say it's a custom subcomponent
that takes in a name or something.
We all know the request response loop,
big fans of the request response loop,
Awake.
Take values from request, invoke action,
append to response, and sleep.
Those three middle ones--
take values from request,
invoke action,
append to response-- there's
a lot of stuff going on there.
And one of the things that goes
on in those three methods are
variable synchronization from
parent component to child component.
What that means is that
take values gets called,
boom, synchronize.
Pass the value into the child component,
pull it back out.
Do it again, invoke action, pass it in,
pull it out.
Do it again, append to response,
pass it in, pull it out.
That's like six method calls there.
If you have a subcomponent
that you're using everywhere,
say a button bar component that
just has some buttons on it that
you want to pull some information
down from the parent for,
say it's just a footer,
and we'll talk about a way of even
making that footer faster in a moment,
and you just need a little bit
of information from the page,
you might want to say, look,
WebObjects don't synchronize
these variables for me,
but instead I'm going to
take care of it myself.
And then in the appropriate method
of the three above that I mentioned,
you can pull or push out
that value that you need.
Now, if you want to talk even faster,
we can talk about using
stateless components.
Now, a stateless component,
whenever a component's instantiated,
you get a new component.
You say, you know, page with name, boom,
new component.
You put a component into a page,
when that page gets instantiated,
that subcomponent, boom,
gets instantiated.
If you say that component's stateless,
WebObjects knows that this is
a component that's not going
to change based on a session or
based on something a user's done.
It's a stateless component.
It loads it up once and it reuses
it over and over and over again.
So, if you have 700 users in your website
and you have that little footer that
has the big legal disclaimer in it,
make that stateless and you don't
have 700 of those lying around.
You have one.
Not only is it faster,
but you use less memory.
Now, in the end here,
we've sort of thrown a couple
little miscellaneous things,
some of which aren't necessarily
related to WebObjects.
But, session timeout.
Chris showed you before we had our
session timeout set to 15 seconds.
That's pretty extreme,
but you might want to see what
the typical user experience
is in your application.
When a session times out,
that memory is available to the garbage
collector to be picked up eventually.
So, that means that when
your session gets bigger,
bigger, bigger,
it can squish it back down a little more.
Fetch outside the request response loop.
If a loser logs in,
then you need to get some
database on that user,
but you don't need it right
away in that first page.
You might want to do a delayed action
to fetch that or to put it in sleep or
somewhere safe to put it outside that
the user's not going to be waiting.
Index your database.
I'm a big fan of getting
someone else to do this for me.
You can notice a marked improvement,
especially if you're just using
single attribute primary keys,
which is what we all know and love
with the Enterprise Objects Framework.
Offload images and static
data to another server.
If you've got an application
that's serving up,
I just experienced this recently,
QuickTime VRs, 300, 400 kilobyte VRs,
and you've got 200,000 of these things.
Well, you don't want your same web server
that's serving up your web app
to be serving up these images.
You might want to have
an additional web server,
vrs.yourcompany.com.
images.yourcompany.com.
Have that serve up the static images and
VRs and sound files and God knows what.
Check your HTML.
Check the HTML.
This is, wow,
this is like really obvious to me now,
but wasn't obvious to me at the time.
I had a page that we designed for
this client of ours with all these
nested tables and it looked just the
way they wanted it and I was like,
oh, thank God that's over with.
And then we hit the page and
it just took forever to render.
It took forever.
This was back in like years ago, 1999,
I think.
Check the HTML.
See if you can't optimize your HTML.
See if it's actually compliant.
Run HTML, run a linting program over it.
Make sure it's valid HTML.
Remove extraneous tables.
Do as much as you can
with as little as you can.
And last but not least, there's Java,
there's Java performance tuning
things like OptimizeIt or JProbe.
I believe OptimizeIt is
currently available on Mac OS X.
Now lastly, but not least,
we'll talk a little bit
about what we've learned.
We talked about determining
where the bottlenecks lie.
Measure, modify, measure.
Remember, again,
in a controlled environment,
change is only one thing.
We talked about WebObjects
and EOF techniques.
We have batch faulting, prefetching.
We have synchronizing bindings,
not synchronizing bindings,
stateless components, that sort of thing.
General programming techniques,
lazy instantiation.
Upgrade your hardware.
Huge thing, right here.
If you're running your application
and you're hitting swap in
a deployment environment,
you're doomed.
There's nothing that you can sit
down and optimize and improve that,
the second that your
machines run out of RAM.
And oftentimes,
you'll discover that hardware is a
lot cheaper than developer manpower.
So with that, I want to let you know
that if you hurry up,
please don't run.
The WebObjects lab is open for another
20 minutes downstairs in room K.
The only session left for WebObjects
Track is the feedback forum,
which is going to start at 3:30.
And there's your contact information,
which I'm sure is all new to you.